Learnt Contrastive Concept Embeddings for Sign Recognition
Ryan Wong1, Necati Cihan Camgoz2, Richard Bowden1
1University of Surrey, United Kingdom
2Meta Reality Labs, Switzerland
{r.wong, r.bowden }@surrey.ac.uk, neccam@meta.com
Abstract
In natural language processing (NLP) of spoken lan-
guages, word embeddings have been shown to be a useful
method to encode the meaning of words. Sign languages are
visual languages, which require sign embeddings to capture
the visual and linguistic semantics of sign.
Unlike many common approaches to Sign Recognition,
we focus on explicitly creating sign embeddings that bridge
the gap between sign language and spoken language. We
propose a learning framework to derive LCC (Learnt Con-
trastive Concept) embeddings for sign langu age, a weakly
supervised contrastive approach to learning sign embed-
dings. We train a vocabulary of embeddings that are based
on the linguistic labels for sign video. Additionally, we de-
velop a conceptual similarity loss which is able to utilise
word embeddings from NLP methods to create sign embed-
dings that have better sign language to spoken language
correspondence. These learnt representations allow the
model to automatically localise the sign in time.
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art keypoint-based
sign recognition performance on the WLASL and BOBSL
datasets.
1. Introduction
Sign languages are visual languages used by Deaf com-
munities around the world. Each country will typically
have its own sign language which differs in their vocabu-
lary. While the vocabulary of lexicons will vary, all sign
languages share common attributes in terms of their use of
hand shape, motion, 3D space, body posture, facial expres-
sion and mouthings in order to communicate. We can think
of these as different channels of information.
The visual complexities of sign language make auto-
matic Sign Language Translation (SLT) a challenging task
for both natural language processing (NLP) and computer
vision. Many methods have been proposed to break the
SLT problem down into simpler tasks. These tasks include
Isolated Sign Recognition, where the goal is to identify asingle sign in a given temporal window or Sign Spotting,
which is the task of identifying and temporally locating
signs within a continuous sequence. All these tasks are used
to help solve the underlying SLT problem of translating a
sign video to the spoken language equivalent.
Many approaches tackle sign recognition as an extension
to gesture recognition by making use of gesture recognition
models [1, 2, 18, 25]. While these approaches have been
shown to be successful at classiﬁcation, for the datasets they
are trained on, they do not explicitly create a sign represen-
tation associated for the sign label. We, therefore, propose
creating learnable sign embeddings which are associated
with signs from the target vocabulary, similar to word em-
beddings used in spoken language NLP . Signs with similar
meaning or context are usually visually similar signs [36].
Motivated by this, we leverage word embeddings from NLP
to learn better sign embeddings. Word embeddings, such as
Word2V ec [28], fastText [4] and GloV e [32], are useful in
NLP as the vector representations capture semantic simi-
larities between words, where words with similar meanings
are closer in the embedding space. In this paper, we guide
the learning of sign embeddings by bringing together signs
with similar meanings in the embedding space.
We summarise our contributions as follows: (1) We in-
troduce a Learnt Contrastive Concept (LCC) embedding
framework, which is a weakly supervised contrastive learn-
ing approach to explicitly learn sign embeddings with ca-
pabilities for automatic sign localisation. (2) We propose
a novel method to integrate spoken language word embed-
dings with sign labels to produce a representation that has
better sign-to-spoken language correspondence. (3) Our
loss function is able to improve skeletal and RGB-based
model performance compared to cross entropy loss used
in past approaches. (4) Our approach is able to outper-
form previous skeleton-based state-of-the-art models on the
WLASL and BOBSL recognition tasks.
2. Related Work
The advancements in computational power and deep
learning have shifted the focus of sign recognition from
This ICCV workshop paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision
Foundation. Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
1945
hand-crafted features to data-driven methods. V arious ap-
proaches to solving sign recognition have been explored
over the years, such as breaking the problem into sub-
problems by creating hand and mouthing shapes to be used
for sign related tasks [11, 24]. These hand and mouthing
shapes have been shown to be useful for both sign recogni-
tion and SLT [6, 7], but they require labels to be manually
annotated at the frame level or learnt with specialised sign
classiﬁcation models [23]. One possible source of phonetic
representation comes from the linguistic annotation in the
form of HamNoSys or SignWriting [14, 37]. Such anno-
tation systems provide detailed transcription for sign lan-
guages but require expert annotators to transcribe the video
which is an expensive and time consuming task.
The development of large scale sign recognition datasets
has allowed the exploration of deep learning based ap-
proaches. Continuous Sign Recognition datasets were
initially created such as RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2014
[13] and RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2014-T [5] for the
task of predicting all signs in a given sign video. Many
approaches tackle this task with models trained with Con-
nectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) loss [7, 15, 29].
In this paper we focus on the sign recognition task.
The AUTSL [34], WLASL [25] and MSASL [19] datasets
have been developed for sign recognition in an isolated set-
ting, as well as developments of sign recognition from co-
articulated videos such as BOBSL [2]. To tackle the sign
recognition tasks on these datasets, action recognition mod-
els are used as inspiration. The inﬂated 3D ConvNet (I3D)
[9] and ResNet2+1D [38] used in human action recogni-
tion has proven useful for transfer learning from large ac-
tion recognition datasets to smaller isolated sign recognition
datasets [1, 2, 17]. The pretrained sign models are used as
feature extractors for the sign language translation task, re-
ducing the RGB frames to a lower dimensional vector [2, 6].
Such methods that use raw video as input assume the
model will learn the person independent features. An alter-
native approach is to use skeleton-based models to reduce
the impact of background noise and the person’s appear-
ance. Most skeleton-based approaches make use of pose
estimators like OpenPose or MediaPipe to detect and extract
human body, hand and facial keypoints [8, 27, 40]. Skele-
tal inputs have been shown to be useful in Action Recog-
nition tasks using Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional
Networks to automatically learn the spatial and temporal
patterns from the data [39]. Jiang et al . proposed the Sign
Language Graph Convolution Network (SL-GCN) for sign
recognition [18]. One of the drawbacks to skeletal-based
models is the requirement for accurate keypoint detection
in the presence of motion, making sign recognition highly
reliant on the pose estimator’s accuracy [31].
Learning sign language speciﬁc representations is cur-
rently an under explored topic but learning representa-tions via contrastive learning is popular in computer vision
[10, 21, 33]. These approaches attempt to learn embeddings
where visually similar samples are close and dissimilar ones
are far away in the embedding space. Sign language is a ﬁne
grain classiﬁcation task which requires a subtle understand-
ing of the small differences between pose, hand shape, mo-
tion and mouthings/face gestures. The multiple channels
convey complementary information and machine learning
models need to learn how these channels interact to under-
stand the sign content. This is especially challenging since
models need to learn features that are signer independent
across datasets that may have a fairly low number of sign-
ers. Bilge et al . look into creating sign representations us-
ing zero-shot sign recognition approaches but require large
quantities of annotations of textual descriptions of the mo-
tion and body pose on these datasets [3]. Albanie et al .h a v e
demonstrated how I3D feature representations are useful for
automatic dense annotations for large-vocabulary sign lan-
guage videos using cosine similarity to create a dataset of
dense sign spottings [30].
While the above approaches have focused on visual sim-
ilarities in sign, Dafnis et al . highlight the importance of
linguistics priors [12]. They modify the labels of WLASL
sign recognition dataset to provide a 1-1 correspondence
between the signs and glosses by comparing the labels of
videos from the WLASL dataset to videos from a sign bank.
They additionally use an external sign dataset to explicitly
learn to detect the start and end frames of the signs as a pre-
processing step before sign recognition. In this work, we
demonstrate an approach that eliminates the need for pre-
processing and automatically localises the signs while clas-
sifying them.
Since sign languages are visual languages, we take a
different approach and look towards NLP to tackle sign
recognition. Word embeddings have been found to be use-
ful to represent spoken words as vectors for text analysis,
where words with similar embeddings have similar mean-
ing. Word2V ec [28] and fastText [4] are examples of such
methods to train meaningful embedding vectors. Motivated
by this, we aim to learn embeddings for the sign recognition
task which brings signs that are visually and linguistically
similar closer together in the embedding space.
3. Method
As shown in Figure 1, our proposed framework has three
core components: an LCC Embedding ,a n Embedding Sim-
ilarity Network and a Sign Recognition Head for the sign
recognition task. The LCC embedding captures the sign in-
formation which has similar functionality to word embed-
dings in NLP , where similar signs will have similar rep-
resentations. The embedding similarity network and sign
recognition head are used to automatically localise and pre-
dict the sign within the sequence. Unlike previous ap-
1946
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed Learnt Contrastive Concept (LCC) embedding framework.
proaches, which make use of only the sign labels to indi-
rectly learn sign representations from visual features, we
explicitly learn the sign representations and incorporate
linguistic knowledge to guide the model to learn visual-
linguistic representations.
In the following section, we describe the architectural
changes to support our framework. Then we elaborate
on the incorporation of our visual-linguistic loss functions
namely, a contrastive recognition loss and a conceptual sim-
ilarity loss.
3.1. Model Architecture
Backbone f(·):Our backbone uses human pose key-
points as input (See Section 3.4 for further details about the
input structure). Given a sign sequence x∈RT×D×Nof
Tlength with Nnodes and feature channels D, we want
to maximise the accuracy of our model to predict the target
label from a vocabulary V. The most common approach to
train such a recognition model is:
ˆy=FC(POOL global(f(x))) (1)
whereˆy∈RVis the logit class prediction. FCis a fully
connected layer and POOL global is the spatio-temporal
global average pooling layer which takes the output rep-
resentation from the model f(x)=z∈RT
σt×C×N
σnto a
vectorˆz∈RC.σtandσnare the dimension reduction fac-
tors from the backbone network for TandNrespectively.
Instead of spatio-temporal global average pooling, we
use spatial global average pooling such that ˆz∈RT
σt×C,
which allows our model to make more ﬁne-grained predic-
tions. For simplicity we will refer toT
σtasT/prime.
LCC Embedding E:To disentangle the embedding rep-
resentation from the model representation ( ˆz), we introduce
LCC embeddings E∈RC×V/prime×Mas the sign embedding
representation, where V/primeis the selected vocabulary size and
Mis the number of variations associated with each item in
the embedding vocabulary. We select V/primewhereV<V/prime.The motivation behind this choice is that not all represen-
tations within the sign sequence should be associated with
an embedding in the given target vocabulary (from index 1
toV) as they may be background , such as signers in their
resting pose, transitions ,o r out of vocabulary signs .
Embedding Similarity Network g(·):We introduce an
embedding similarity network to allow the model to learn
good representations with a strong correlation to the rele-
vant LCC embeddings. ˆzandEare compared using the
cosine similarity function:
ci=simi(ˆzi,E)=ˆzi·E
/bardblˆzi/bardbl/bardblE/bardbl(2)
whereiis the temporal index of ˆzto produce the similarity
scoreci∈[−1,1]V/prime×M. The resulting score is calculated
by taking the average cosine similarity plus maximum co-
sine similarity across variations Mwhereˆci∈RV/prime. This is
computed for each index in T/primesuch that ˆc∈RT/prime×V/prime. Us-
ingˆcwe apply a temperature scalar τfollowed by a softmax
function as:
q=g(z,E)=softmax (ˆc/τ) (3)
whereq∈RT/prime×V/prime. Our motivation is for the model to
explicitly learn representations for the sign vocabulary for
each time segment T/prime.
Sign Recognition Head r(·):The network grequires the
label associated to each time segment T/prime, which are not
available in sign recognition datasets. Sign recognition
datasets only provide information that a sign exists within
the given video clip. Isolated sign recognition datasets typ-
ically have signers in the resting pose which are irrelevant
for the sign label. We, therefore, create a sign recognition
headrwith the assumption that given a sufﬁciently large
temporal window Tfor a given sequence x, if we know that
the signvjfrom vocabulary Vexist somewhere in the se-
quencex, then we can set the label vjto our target value.
1947
For our model to learn the existence of a sign we need a
functionr(·)that takes q∈RT/prime×V/primeand outputs ˆq∈[0,1]V.
More formally, our objective for ris to output ˆqj=1
when the target sign corresponds to the jthelement in the
vocabulary, and if not output ˆqj=0 . To achieve this, we
formulate ras:
ˆq=r(q)=/bracketleftBigg/summationtextT/prime
t=0qjt/summationtextT/prime
t=0/summationtextV
k=1qkt/bracketrightBiggj:(1..V)
(4)
The output is then a Vlength vector with values between
0 and 1, which indicate the existence of a sign from our
given target vocabulary.
3.2. Learning Objective
Contrastive Recognition Loss Lrec:Unlike previous ap-
proaches which apply global average pooling from Eq. (1),
our approach instead learns to localise the sign within the
sequence using our weakly supervised contrastive recogni-
tion loss.
From Eq. (4), rallows the model to learn the existence
of the sign in the given sequence since we only take the
sum across the given target vocabulary [1,...,V]and not the
extended vocabulary [(V+1 ),...,V/prime]. We apply a binary
cross entropy loss for the contrastive recognition loss Lrec,
where the target is the one-hot encoded vector of the label
associated with the sign sequence. This allows our model to
bring matching signs closer together within the embedding
space while pushing dissimilar signs further apart.
Conceptual Similarity Loss Lconcept :Since sign lan-
guage is a visual language, there are many signs that look
very similar or the same, with small discriminating factors.
For example, stomach and abdomen are signed in almost
identical ways in the WLASL dataset. Therefore the repre-
sentations should be similar. Generally speaking, when this
is the case, the semantic similarity of the spoken word or
gloss should also be similar.
We introduce a new method to integrate sign language
with spoken languages. We use fastText embeddings [4]
of the glosses and learn visual embeddings which learn the
correlation between sign embeddings and spoken language
embeddings from the target vocabulary. We propose a con-
ceptual similarity loss Lconcept , where we take the cosine
similarity between the fastText embeddings Ffor the target
vocabulary to create a similarity matrix SF∈[−1,1]V×V.
The matrix is used to provide the model with a measure of
the similarity of words. We then repeat the process with
the LCC embeddings E1..Vto create the visual embedding
cosine similarity SE∈[−1,1]V×V. A Mean Squared Er-
ror loss minimises the distance between SFandSE. This
allows our sign embeddings to learn similar linguistic em-
bedding distributions as the word embeddings.Combined Loss: We apply our learning objectives simul-
taneously during training. This allows the model to learn
visual-linguistic representations and automatically localise
signs within the given sequence. We apply a weighted loss
LrecandLconcept to create our LCC loss L:
L=α∗Lconcept+β∗Lrec (5)
3.3. Drop Feature Mask
In the standard classiﬁcation task, cross entropy loss is
used with dropout before the ﬁnal fully connected layer to
improve the model’s performance [35]. Since we measure
cosine similarity between features, we introduce drop fea-
ture masking to our representations ˆzandEwhere we zero
out a portion of the same index channels in dimension C
for bothˆzandE. We also apply this at the temporal level
which randomly zeros out the features at certain time seg-
ments. This technique allows our model to create a better
embedding representation by utilising more of the feature
channels.
3.4. Multi-channel Learning
We use a skeleton-based GCN as our backbone model.
Skeleton representations, or keypoints, naturally provide a
high degree of person independence by discarding irrele-
vant information, such as background, clothing or appear-
ance. Jiang et al . highlights the issues of using a large num-
ber of keypoints and employs a graph reduction technique to
signiﬁcantly improve performance on sign recognition [17].
We use an alternative approach where different sign chan-
nels (body, hands and face) are input into separate GCN
models. This allows our model’s graph structure to remain
small and gives it the ability to learn from each sign chan-
nel separately before fusing the sign features together. We
use Mediapipe Holistic [27] to extract the keypoints. We
extract 4 different channels which include two hands, of 21
keypoints each, 40 keypoints representing the mouth and
17 keypoints for the body pose. For the links between key-
points we use the default human skeletal connections with
additional links on the body for a better hand-to-body inter-
action as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Keypoints extracted from Mediapipe used as the input
into the different channels. Additional keypoint links shown by
the dashed orange lines were added to allow the model to learn
better hand-to-body interactions.
We create three separate GCN models and apply our
learning objective from Eq. (5) on the output of the hands
1948
(where each hand has a shared backbone GCN and aver-
age the output hand features for ˆz), mouthing and pose as
Lh,LmandLp. We also concatenate the ˆzfeature out-
puts across all GCNs outputs to create a global represen-
tation and use a fully connected layer to reduce the dimen-
sions back to the original dimensionality and apply the same
learning objective ( Lglobal ) with a separate global LCC net-
work head (with the LCC embedding, embedding similarity
network and sign recognition head). The ﬁnal learning ob-
jective is:
Loverall=Lglobal+Lh+Lm+Lp (6)
At inference, the predicted label is selected based on the
index of the largest value of ˆqfrom the global LCC network
head.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
We evaluate our approach on two different sign recogni-
tion tasks: isolated sign recognition and the recognition of
a co-articulated sign in continuous footage.
WLASL2000 is a large-scale video dataset for Ameri-
can Sign Language (ASL) recognition. It is a challenging
isolated sign recognition dataset as it was collected from un-
constrained records with a large vocabulary of 2000 unique
signs. Additional challenges are the signer-independent set-
ting with over 100 signers and limited examples for each
sign.
BOBSL is a large-scale co-articulated sign dataset for
British Sign Language (BSL) obtained from broadcast
videos. The recognition task on the BOBSL dataset poses
new challenges for sign recognition as continuous co-
articulated sign is typically signed faster than in an isolated
setting. The dataset contains 2281 sign classes obtained by
using automatic spotting tools from mouthings and dictio-
nary sources, which has the added difﬁculty of noisy labels
and large class imbalances.
4.2. Implementation Details
We use the MS-G3N as our backbone GCN model due
to its high performance on skeletal action recognition [26].
For simplicity, we keep all model hyperparameters the same
across each GCN. We keep the original hyperparameters
from [26] but set the number of scales to 5 and use a window
size of 5 with a dilation of 1 for the MS-G3D pathways.
We use a sequence length of 64 and 16 for WLASL2000
and BOBSL, respectively. During training, rotation, scaling
and shifting are used as keypoint data augmentation. We set
the size of V/primeto beV+1 0 withαof5.0andβof10.0
for the scaling factors of Lconcept andLrec, respectively.
We train the model with a batch size of 64 with a learning
rate of 0.0012. On the WLASL dataset, we schedule ourlearning rate with a warm-up of 10 epochs and decay with
a cosine policy to match the training strategy of [18] on the
WLASL dataset, but train our model for 100 epochs instead
of 200. We use a multi-step learning rate scheduler for the
BOBSL dataset by reducing the learning rate by 0.1 at 10
and 20 epochs and train our model for 25 epochs in total.
The model is optimized using the Adam optimizer [22]
with a weight decay of 0.0001, where we select the model
which has the best accuracy on the validation set for evalu-
ation on the test set.
4.3. Evaluation Protocol
We evaluate our models on the top-1 and top-5 per-
instance classiﬁcation accuracy as well as the top-1 and top-
5 per-class accuracy. Our proposed training strategy is com-
pared to our model trained with cross entropy loss approach,
using global average pooling and a classiﬁcation layer, to
directly analyse the impact of our approach. Then, we com-
pare our approach to state-of-the-art keypoints results on
both WLASL2000 and BOBSL datasets. We also demon-
strate the effectiveness of our framework to RGB-based sign
recognition models.
4.4. Results on Isolated Sign Recognition
ModelsInstance Acc. Class Acc.
top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
SignBERT (H+P) [16] 47.46 83.32 45.17 82.32
BEST (Keypoint) [41] 46.25 79.33 43.52 77.65
SL-GCN [18] 51.50 84.94 48.87 84.02
Ours (CE) 51.95 82.52 48.89 81.15
Ours (LCC) 59.38 89.82 56.57 88.90
Table 1. Per-instance and per-class accuracy on the WLASL2000
test set for the keypoint modality models. CE and LCC correspond
to our models trained with cross entropy and LCC loss, respec-
tively.
Comparisons to baseline: We compare our proposed
loss to cross entropy loss used in previous methods on
the WLASL2000 dataset. In Table 1, we ﬁnd that our
model trained with cross entropy loss achieves similar per-
formance to the SL-GCN model. The addition of our loss
signiﬁcantly improves the test accuracy by 7.43% top-1 in-
stance accuracy. Furthermore, the proposed approach has
the additional beneﬁt of providing localisation of the target
sign as shown in Section 4.7.
Comparison to state-of-the-art: In Table 1, we ﬁnd that
our multi-stream keypoint model is able to signiﬁcantly out-
perform other keypoint modality models. Our multi-stream
1949
keypoint model is able to outperform the previous multi-
stream keypoint model SL-GCN by improving the top-1 in-
stance accuracy by 7.88%. While we are aware of Bidirec-
tional Skeleton-Based Graph Convolutional Networks [12],
we are unable to directly compare against it as the approach
was evaluated on an unreleased modiﬁed WLASL dataset
with 1449 lexical signs and contains additional preprocess-
ing to detect the sign’s start and stopping frames. Our
model has the additional beneﬁt of automatically detecting
the sign’s start and stopping frames.
We ﬁnd that our keypoint modality results also achieve
competitive results with a multi-modal ensemble such as
SAM-SLR v1 and v2 [18, 17] which make use of keypoints,
features, RGB frames and RGB ﬂow as input modalities to
the multiple models to achieve 59.39% and 91.48% top-1
and top-5 per-instance accuracy respectively.
Further analysis of the individual streams of joint, bone,
joint motion and bone motion in Table 2 shows signiﬁcant
individual stream performance improvements compared to
SL-GCN. Our joint-based model is also able to outperform
all previous single model results.
Stream ModelsInstance Acc.
top-1 top-5
JointSL-GCN 45.61 77.79
Ours (LCC) 55.52 86.76
BoneSL-GCN 43.27 75.58
Ours (LCC) 54.37 85.78
Joint MotionSL-GCN 27.23 56.73
Ours (LCC) 46.56 78.76
Bone MotionSL-GCN 31.26 60.35
Ours (LCC) 46.66 76.37
Multi-streamSL-GCN 51.50 84.94
Ours (LCC) 59.38 89.82
Table 2. Comparison between our LCC approach and SL-GCN on
individual keypoint streams on the WLASL test set.
4.5. Results on Sign Recognition in continuous
footage
ModelsInstance Acc. Class Acc.
top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
2D Pose→Sign [2] 61.8 82.1 30.6 56.6
Ours (CE) 67.8 87.0 34.9 60.9
Ours (LCC) 71.7 89.3 37.3 64.5
Table 3. Comparison of accuracy on the BOBSL test set. CE: Our
model trained with Cross Entropy loss, LCC: Our model trained
with LCC loss.Comparison to baseline: In Table 3, we show that our
model trained with our loss is able to improve multi-stream
model performance by almost 4% on the top-1 instance
accuracy compared to cross entropy loss on the BOBSL
recognition task.
Further analysis of the keypoint modality on the individ-
ual streams of joint, bone, joint motion and bone motion in
Table 4 shows similar improvements compared to cross en-
tropy loss on individual streams. Our joint based model is
able to produce the best individual stream results.
Stream LossInstance Acc.
top-1 top-5
JointCE 66.28 86.02
LCC 70.89 88.83
BoneCE 66.02 85.71
LCC 70.54 88.61
Joint MotionCE 61.05 81.60
LCC 67.49 86.18
Bone MotionCE 61.02 81.80
LCC 66.93 85.68
Multi-streamCE 67.75 86.99
LCC 71.72 89.32
Table 4. Comparison between our model trained with cross en-
tropy loss (CE) versus our LCC loss on the BOBSL test set.
Comparison to state-of-the-art: In Table 3, we show
that our approach is able to outperform the previous key-
point based model (2D Pose →Sign) by almost 10% top-1
accuracy. All of our individual stream results are able to
outperform 2D Pose →Sign by more than 5% top-1 accu-
racy.
4.6. Ablation Study
We perform our ablation study on the WLASL validation
dataset using the joint-based stream for our model.
Impact of temperature: The temperature τplays an im-
portant part in the model’s performance. We ﬁnd that when
the temperature is too high, it has a negative impact on
the model’s performance. In Table 5, τ=0.1gives the
strongest performance improvements.
Impact of Lconcept :Due to the recognition loss Lrechav-
ing a contrastive objective to match representations from the
model to the target vocabulary embedding, the model tends
to push other representations further apart. This is detri-
mental in cases where signs are visually similar. Our Con-
ceptual Similarity Loss Lconcept attempts to alleviate these
1950
Figure 3. Comparison of similarity matrices for the word embeddings from fastText (left), sign embeddings from a model trained without
conceptual similarity loss (middle) and sign embeddings trained with conceptual similarity loss (right). Red regions highlight that thesimilarity matrix trained with the conceptual similarity has similar linguistic embedding distributions to the word embeddings.
τInstance Acc.
top-1 top-5
0.5 0.1938 0.4816
0.2 0.3897 0.71810.1 0.5181 0.8307
0.05 0.5023 0.8159
Table 5. Table demonstrating the impact of the temperature value
has on the WLASL validation accuracy
issues by creating visual embeddings which match the dis-
tances between words from word embeddings. In Table 6,we show that the inclusion of L
concept greatly improves the
accuracy.
LrecLconcept Instance Acc.
βα top-1 top-5
10.0 0.0 52.76 82.7910.0 1.0 53.32 84.5310.0 5.0 54.29 84.60
10.0 10.0 54.11 83.96
Table 6. Table demonstrating the importance and impact that the
cosine similarity loss has on the WLASL validation accuracy
In Figure 3, we show the impact the conceptual similarity
loss has on the embeddings by computing the cosine simi-
larity between our sign embeddings. As shown, without thesimilarity loss the model tends to learn a similar structure tothe word embedding. The conceptual similarity loss is ableto regularise features in our embedding space to match thedistribution of the associated word embedding space. Forexample, the signs for stomach and abdomen in Figure 3have higher similarity scores (brighter) with a model trainedwithL
concept (right) than without (middle).
Impact of drop feature masking: We introduce drop fea-
ture masking on the embedding features for both the modeloutputs and vocabulary embedding to create representationsthat reduce overﬁtting and over-reliance on certain featurechannels. In Table 7, we show that the inclusion of dropmasking improves performance.
dfmInstance Acc.
top-1 top-5
− 54.52 85.32
/check 56.66 87.16
Table 7. Table demonstrating the impact of drop feature masking
on WLASL validation results.
Impact of backbone: As an additional study, we evalu-
ate our approach using an RGB backbone model to demon-
strate that our framework is input-agnostic. A limitation ofmulti-channel RGB inputs is the heavy computational re-quirements. Separate video crops for each sign channel aremore memory intensive compared to the keypoint based ap-proach, we therefore use the I3D model with full frames asinput. Previous methods have shown that transfer learningof models on other sign language datasets improves signrecognition performance [1, 17]. We, therefore, use In-ception I3D pretrained on Kinetic dataset [20] to directly
1951
evaluate the impact of our approach compared to cross en-
tropy loss without any pretraining on external sign language
datasets. We apply our learning objective from Eq. (5). For
data augmentation during training, we ﬁrst apply frame re-
sizing to256×256 then random cropping of 224×224 with
random horizontal ﬂipping and colour jitter.
ModelsInstance Acc. Class Acc.
top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
I3D (CE) 41.38 74.98 38.93 73.94
I3D (LCC) 43.92 77.80 41.10 75.97
Table 8. Table demonstrating the difference between our LCC loss
with a RGB backbone (LCC) versus cross entropy loss (CE) on
the WLASL test set.
In Table 8, we show that our proposed loss is able to
improve performance compared to cross entropy loss. This
experiment demonstrates that our model is capable of gen-
eralising to RGB models.
4.7. Sign Localisation
Our model is able to temporally locate the target sign in
a given sign sequence using the output value q. In Figure 4,
we show the visualisation of the localisation of the signs.
We ﬁnd that in WLASL2000 there are many sequences with
signers in their resting pose, which are irrelevant to the tar-
get vocabulary. Our model is able to identify those back-
ground segments. Similarly, for BOBSL, our model is able
to identify when a sign is out of vocabulary and localise the
target vocabulary signs.
Figure 4. Localisation of identiﬁed signs, target word highlighted
in orange, where temporal activations are shown in brighter
colours. The background class is the sum of the probabilities
across extended vocabulary.4.8. Limitations
One of the limitations of the GCN model is its reliance
on the accuracy of keypoint inputs. Past research has high-
lighted that existing pretrained pose estimators may fail in
hand-to-hand or hand-to-face interactions [31].
Secondly, our framework assumes that the conceptual
similarity of the words often implies visual similarity in sign
language. While we show experiments on the inclusion of
the conceptual similarity loss that supports our hypothesis,
it may not always be the case for all signs, for example on
the signs of names and places.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce Learnt Contrastive Concept
embeddings framework, a novel training strategy to learn
sign embeddings by employing a weakly supervised con-
trastive training pipeline that is able to learn sign embed-
dings from the sign recognition task. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach for the localisation of signs
and how our framework can be used to improve results on
sign recognition compared to cross entropy loss. Our model
is able to signiﬁcantly outperform previous keypoint recog-
nition results on both WLASL and BOBSL datasets. Our
approach is able to utilise word embeddings to create sign
embeddings that incorporate visual-linguistic features that
will hopefully be useful for future work in sign language
translation. For future work, exploration of improving the
framework for continuous sign recognition may be useful to
solve as the next step for automatic sign language transla-
tion research.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the EPSRC project Ex-
TOL (EP/R03298X/1), SNSF project ’SMILE II’ (CR-
SII5 193686), European Union’s Horizon2020 programme
(’EASIER’ grant agreement 101016982) and the Innosuisse
IICT Flagship (PFFS-21-47). This work reﬂects only the
authors view and the Commission is not responsible for any
use that may be made of the information it contains
References
[1] Samuel Albanie, G ¨ul V arol, Liliane Momeni, Triantafyllos
Afouras, Joon Son Chung, Neil Fox, and Andrew Zisserman.
Bsl-1k: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition
using mouthing cues. In European Conference on Computer
Vision , pages 35–53. Springer, 2020.
[2] Samuel Albanie, G ¨ul V arol, Liliane Momeni, Hannah Bull,
Triantafyllos Afouras, Himel Chowdhury, Neil Fox, Ben-
cie Woll, Rob Cooper, Andrew McParland, et al. Bbc-
oxford british sign language dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.03635 , 2021.
1952
[3] Y unus Can Bilge, Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, and Nazli
Ikizler-Cinbis. Towards zero-shot sign language recognition.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence , 2022.
[4] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors with subword infor-
mation. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 5:135–146, 2017.
[5] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Simon Hadﬁeld, Oscar Koller, Her-
mann Ney, and Richard Bowden. Neural sign language trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 7784–7793, 2018.
[6] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadﬁeld, and
Richard Bowden. Multi-channel transformers for multi-
articulatory sign language translation. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision , pages 301–319. Springer, 2020.
[7] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadﬁeld, and
Richard Bowden. Sign language transformers: Joint end-to-
end sign language recognition and translation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 10023–10033, 2020.
[8] Zhe Cao, Gines Hidalgo, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and
Yaser Sheikh. Openpose: realtime multi-person 2d pose
estimation using part afﬁnity ﬁelds. IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 43(1):172–186,
2019.
[9] Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action
recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. In pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 6299–6308, 2017.
[10] Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He.
Improved baselines with momentum contrastive learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297 , 2020.
[11] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Simon Hadﬁeld, Oscar Koller, and
Richard Bowden. Subunets: End-to-end hand shape and
continuous sign language recognition. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages
3056–3065, 2017.
[12] Konstantinos M Dafnis, Evgenia Chroni, Carol Neidle, and
Dimitri Metaxas. Bidirectional skeleton-based isolated sign
recognition using graph convolutional networks. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference , pages 7328–7338, 2022.
[13] Jens Forster, Christoph Schmidt, Oscar Koller, Martin Bell-
gardt, and Hermann Ney. Extensions of the sign language
recognition and translation corpus rwth-phoenix-weather. In
LREC , pages 1911–1916, 2014.
[14] Thomas Hanke. Hamnosys-representing sign language data
in language resources and language processing contexts. In
LREC , volume 4, pages 1–6, 2004.
[15] Aiming Hao, Y uecong Min, and Xilin Chen. Self-mutual dis-
tillation learning for continuous sign language recognition.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision , pages 11303–11312, 2021.
[16] Hezhen Hu, Weichao Zhao, Wengang Zhou, Y uechen Wang,
and Houqiang Li. Signbert: pre-training of hand-model-
aware representation for sign language recognition. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision , pages 11087–11096, 2021.
[17] Songyao Jiang, Bin Sun, Lichen Wang, Y ue Bai, Kun-
peng Li, and Y un Fu. Sign language recognition via
skeleton-aware multi-model ensemble. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.06161 , 2021.
[18] Songyao Jiang, Bin Sun, Lichen Wang, Y ue Bai, Kunpeng
Li, and Y un Fu. Skeleton aware multi-modal sign language
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3413–
3423, 2021.
[19] Hamid Reza V aezi Joze and Oscar Koller. Ms-asl: A large-
scale data set and benchmark for understanding american
sign language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01053 , 2018.
[20] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang,
Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola,
Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics hu-
man action video dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950 ,
2017.
[21] Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna,
Y onglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, and
Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:18661–18673,
2020.
[22] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 ,
2014.
[23] Oscar Koller, Necati Cihan Camgoz, Hermann Ney, and
Richard Bowden. Weakly supervised learning with multi-
stream cnn-lstm-hmms to discover sequential parallelism in
sign language videos. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 42(9):2306–2320, 2019.
[24] Oscar Koller, Hermann Ney, and Richard Bowden. Deep
learning of mouth shapes for sign language. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
Workshops , pages 85–91, 2015.
[25] Dongxu Li, Cristian Rodriguez, Xin Y u, and Hongdong Li.
Word-level deep sign language recognition from video: A
new large-scale dataset and methods comparison. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications
of computer vision , pages 1459–1469, 2020.
[26] Ziyu Liu, Hongwen Zhang, Zhenghao Chen, Zhiyong Wang,
and Wanli Ouyang. Disentangling and unifying graph convo-
lutions for skeleton-based action recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 143–152, 2020.
[27] Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris Mc-
Clanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays, Fan Zhang, Chuo-
Ling Chang, Ming Guang Y ong, Juhyun Lee, et al. Medi-
apipe: A framework for building perception pipelines. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.08172 , 2019.
[28] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean.
Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 , 2013.
[29] Y uecong Min, Aiming Hao, Xiujuan Chai, and Xilin Chen.
Visual alignment constraint for continuous sign language
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision , pages 11542–11551, 2021.
1953
[30] Liliane Momeni, Hannah Bull, KR Prajwal, Samuel Albanie,
G¨ul V arol, and Andrew Zisserman. Automatic dense anno-
tation of large-vocabulary sign language videos. In ECCV
2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, Octo-
ber 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXV , pages 671–690.
Springer, 2022.
[31] Amit Moryossef, Ioannis Tsochantaridis, Joe Dinn,
Necati Cihan Camgoz, Richard Bowden, Tao Jiang, Annette
Rios, Mathias Muller, and Sarah Ebling. Evaluating the
immediate applicability of pose estimation for sign language
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
3434–3440, 2021.
[32] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Man-
ning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In
Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 1532–1543,
2014.
[33] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin.
Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face recognition and clus-
tering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 815–823, 2015.
[34] Ozge Mercanoglu Sincan and Hacer Yalim Keles. Autsl:
A large scale multi-modal turkish sign language dataset and
baseline methods. IEEE Access , 8:181340–181355, 2020.
[35] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple way
to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. The journal of
machine learning research , 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
[36] William C Stokoe. Sign language structure. Annual review
of anthropology , pages 365–390, 1980.
[37] V alerie Sutton. Signwriting. Sl: sn , page 9, 2009.
[38] Du Tran, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, Jamie Ray, Yann
LeCun, and Manohar Paluri. A closer look at spatiotemporal
convolutions for action recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion , pages 6450–6459, 2018.
[39] Sijie Yan, Y uanjun Xiong, and Dahua Lin. Spatial tempo-
ral graph convolutional networks for skeleton-based action
recognition. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence , 2018.
[40] Fan Zhang, V alentin Bazarevsky, Andrey V akunov, Andrei
Tkachenka, George Sung, Chuo-Ling Chang, and Matthias
Grundmann. Mediapipe hands: On-device real-time hand
tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10214 , 2020.
[41] Weichao Zhao, Hezhen Hu, Wengang Zhou, Jiaxin Shi,
and Houqiang Li. Best: Bert pre-training for sign lan-
guage recognition with coupling tokenization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.05075 , 2023.
1954
